5   Supporting Tools
5.1   Library documentation tool (Libdoc)
5.2   input data documentation tool (Testdoc)
5.3   input data clean-up tool (Tidy)
5.4   External tools
5.1   Library documentation tool (Libdoc)
5.1.1   General usage
5.1.2   Writing documentation
5.1.3   Documentation syntax
5.1.4   Internal linking
5.1.5   Representing arguments
5.1.6   Libdoc example
Libdoc is Robot Framework's built-in tool that can generate documentation for Robot Framework libraries and resource files. It can generate HTML documentation for humans as well as machine readable spec files in XML and JSON formats. Libdoc also has few special commands to show library or resource information on the console.

Documentation can be created for:

libraries implemented using the normal static library API,
libraries using the dynamic API, including remote libraries,
resource files,
suite files, and
suite initialization files.
Additionally it is possible to use XML and JSON spec files created by Libdoc earlier as an input.

Note

Support for generating documentation for suite files and suite initialization files is new in Robot Framework 6.0.

Note

The support for the JSON spec files is new in Robot Framework 4.0.

5.1.1   General usage
Synopsis
libdoc [options] library_or_resource output_file
libdoc [options] library_or_resource list|show|version [names]
Options
-f, --format <html|xml|json|libspec>
 	Specifies whether to generate an HTML output for humans or a machine readable spec file in XML or JSON format. The libspec format means XML spec with documentations converted to HTML. The default format is got from the output file extension.
-s, --specdocformat <raw|html>
 	Specifies the documentation format used with XML and JSON spec files. raw means preserving the original documentation format and html means converting documentation to HTML. The default is raw with XML spec files and html with JSON specs and when using the special libspec format. New in Robot Framework 4.0.
-F, --docformat <robot|html|text|rest>
 	Specifies the source documentation format. Possible values are Robot Framework's documentation format, HTML, plain text, and reStructuredText. Default value can be specified in test library source code and the initial default value is robot.
--theme <dark|light|none>
 	Use dark or light HTML theme. If this option is not used, or the value is none, the theme is selected based on the browser color scheme. Only applicable with HTML outputs. New in Robot Framework 6.0.
-N, --name <newname>
 	Sets the name of the documented library or resource.
-V, --version <newversion>
 	Sets the version of the documented library or resource. The default value for test libraries is defined in the source code.
-P, --pythonpath <path>
 	Additional locations where to search for libraries and resources similarly as when running tests.
--quiet	Do not print the path of the generated output file to the console. New in Robot Framework 4.0.
-h, --help	Prints this help.
Executing Libdoc
The easiest way to run Libdoc is using the libdoc command created as part of the normal installation:

libdoc ExampleLibrary ExampleLibrary.html
Alternatively it is possible to execute the robot.libdoc module directly. This approach is especially useful if you have installed Robot Framework using multiple Python versions and want to use a specific version with Libdoc:

python -m robot.libdoc ExampleLibrary ExampleLibrary.html
python3.9 -m robot.libdoc ExampleLibrary ExampleLibrary.html
Yet another alternative is running the robot.libdoc module as a script:

python path/to/robot/libdoc.py ExampleLibrary ExampleLibrary.html
Note

The separate libdoc command is new in Robot Framework 4.0.

Specifying library or resource file
Python libraries and dynamic libraries with name or path
When documenting libraries implemented with Python or that use the dynamic library API, it is possible to specify the library either by using just the library name or path to the library source code:

libdoc ExampleLibrary ExampleLibrary.html
libdoc src/ExampleLibrary.py docs/ExampleLibrary.html
In the former case the library is searched using the module search path and its name must be in the same format as when importing libraries in Robot Framework input data.

If these libraries require arguments when they are imported, the arguments must be catenated with the library name or path using two colons like MyLibrary::arg1::arg2. If arguments change what keywords the library provides or otherwise alter its documentation, it might be a good idea to use --name option to also change the library name accordingly.

Resource files with path
Resource files must always be specified using a path:

libdoc example.resource example.html
If the path does not exist, resource files are also searched from all directories in the module search path similarly as when executing test cases.

Libdoc spec files
Earlier generated Libdoc XML or JSON spec files can also be used as inputs. This works if spec files use either *.xml, *.libspec or *.json extension:

libdoc Example.xml Example.html
libdoc Example.libspec Example.html
libdoc Example.json Example.html
Note

Support for the *.libspec extension is new in Robot Framework 3.2.

Note

Support for the *.json extension is new in Robot Framework 4.0.

Generating documentation
Libdoc can generate documentation in HTML (for humans) and XML or JSON (for tools) formats. The file where to write the documentation is specified as the second argument after the library/resource name or path, and the output format is got from the output file extension by default.

Libdoc HTML documentation
Most Robot Framework libraries use Libdoc to generate library documentation in HTML format. This format is thus familiar for most people who have used Robot Framework. A simple example can be seen below, and it has been generated based on the example found a bit later in this section.

src/SupportingTools/ExampleLibrary.png
The HTML documentation starts with general library introduction, continues with a section about configuring the library when it is imported (when applicable), and finally has shortcuts to all keywords and the keywords themselves. The magnifying glass icon on the lower right corner opens the keyword search dialog that can also be opened by simply pressing the s key.

Libdoc automatically creates HTML documentation if the output file extension is *.html. If there is a need to use some other extension, the format can be specified explicitly with the --format option.

libdoc OperatingSystem OperatingSystem.html
libdoc --name MyLibrary Remote::http://10.0.0.42:8270 MyLibrary.html
libdoc --format HTML test/resource.robot doc/resource.htm
Libdoc XML spec files
Libdoc can also generate documentation in XML format that is suitable for external tools such as editors. It contains all the same information as the HTML format but in a machine readable format.

XML spec files also contain library and keyword source information so that the library and each keyword can have source path (source attribute) and line number (lineno attribute). The source path is relative to the directory where the spec file is generated thus does not refer to a correct file if the spec is moved. The source path is omitted with keywords if it is the same as with the library, and both the source path and the line number are omitted if getting them from the library fails for whatever reason.

Libdoc automatically uses the XML format if the output file extension is *.xml or *.libspec. When using the special *.libspec extension, Libdoc automatically enables the options -f XML -s HTML which means creating an XML output file where keyword documentation is converted to HTML. If needed, the format can be explicitly set with the --format option.

libdoc OperatingSystem OperatingSystem.xml
libdoc test/resource.robot doc/resource.libspec
libdoc --format xml MyLibrary MyLibrary.spec
libdoc --format xml -s html MyLibrary MyLibrary.xml
The exact Libdoc spec file format is documented with an XML schema (XSD) at https://github.com/robotframework/robotframework/tree/master/doc/schema. The spec file format may change between Robot Framework major releases.

To make it easier for external tools to know how to parse a certain spec file, the spec file root element has a dedicated specversion attribute. It was added in Robot Framework 3.2 with value 2 and earlier spec files can be considered to have version 1. The spec version will be incremented in the future if and when changes are made. Robot Framework 4.0 introduced new spec version 3 which is incompatible with earlier versions.

Note

The XML:HTML format introduced in Robot Framework 3.2. has been replaced by the format LIBSPEC ot the option combination --format XML --specdocformat HTML.

Note

Including source information and spec version are new in Robot Framework 3.2.

Libdoc JSON spec files
Since Robot Framework 4.0 Libdoc can also generate documentation in JSON format that is suitable for external tools such as editors or web pages. It contains all the same information as the HTML format but in a machine readable format.

Similar to XML spec files the JSON spec files contain all information and can also be used as input to Libdoc. From that format any other output format can be created. By default the library documentation strings are converted to HTML format within the JSON output file.

The exact JSON spec file format is documented with an JSON schema at https://github.com/robotframework/robotframework/tree/master/doc/schema. The spec file format may change between Robot Framework major releases.

Viewing information on console
Libdoc has three special commands to show information on the console. These commands are used instead of the name of the output file, and they can also take additional arguments.

list
List names of the keywords the library/resource contains. Can be limited to show only certain keywords by passing optional patterns as arguments. Keyword is listed if its name contains given pattern.
show
Show library/resource documentation. Can be limited to show only certain keywords by passing names as arguments. Keyword is shown if its name matches any given name. Special argument intro will show only the library introduction and importing sections.
version
Show library version
Optional patterns given to list and show are case and space insensitive. Both also accept * and ? as wildcards.

Examples:

libdoc Dialogs list
libdoc SeleniumLibrary list browser
libdoc Remote::10.0.0.42:8270 show
libdoc Dialogs show PauseExecution execute*
libdoc SeleniumLibrary show intro
libdoc SeleniumLibrary version
5.1.2   Writing documentation
This section discusses writing documentation for Python based test libraries that use the static library API as well as for dynamic libraries and resource files. Creating test libraries and resource files is described in more details elsewhere in the User Guide.

Python libraries
The documentation for Python libraries that use the static library API is written simply as doc strings for the library class or module and for methods implementing keywords. The first line of the method documentation is considered as a short documentation for the keyword (used, for example, as a tool tip in links in the generated HTML documentation), and it should thus be as describing as possible, but not too long.

The simple example below illustrates how to write the documentation in general. How the HTML documentation generated based on this example looks like can be seen above, and there is also a bit longer example at the end of this chapter.

class ExampleLibrary:
    """Library for demo purposes.

    This library is only used in an example and it doesn't do anything useful.
    """

    def my_keyword(self):
        """Does nothing."""
        pass

    def your_keyword(self, arg):
        """Takes one argument and *does nothing* with it.

        Examples:
        | Your Keyword | xxx |
        | Your Keyword | yyy |
        """
        pass
Tip

If you library does some initialization work that should not be done when using Libdoc, you can easily detect is Robot Framework running

Tip

For more information on Python documentation strings, see PEP-257.

Dynamic libraries
To be able to generate meaningful documentation for dynamic libraries, the libraries must return keyword argument names and documentation using get_keyword_arguments and get_keyword_documentation methods (or using their camelCase variants getKeywordArguments and getKeywordDocumentation). Libraries can also support general library documentation via special __intro__ and __init__ values to the get_keyword_documentation method.

See the Dynamic library API section for more information about how to create these methods.

Importing section
A separate section about how the library is imported is created based on its initialization methods. If the library has an __init__ method that takes arguments in addition to self, its documentation and arguments are shown.

class TestLibrary:

    def __init__(self, mode='default')
        """Creates new TestLibrary. `mode` argument is used to determine mode."""
        self.mode = mode

    def some_keyword(self, arg):
        """Does something based on given `arg`.

        What is done depends on the `mode` specified when `importing` the library.
        """
        if self.mode == 'secret':
             # ...
Resource file documentation
Keywords in resource files can have documentation using [Documentation] setting, and this documentation is also used by Libdoc. First line of the documentation (until the first implicit newline or explicit \n) is considered to be the short documentation similarly as with test libraries.

Also the resource file itself can have Documentation in the Setting section for documenting the whole resource file.

Possible variables in resource files can not be documented.

*** Settings ***
Documentation    Resource file for demo purposes.
...              This resource is only used in an example and it doesn't do anything useful.

*** Keywords ***
My Keyword
    [Documentation]   Does nothing
    No Operation

Your Keyword
    [Arguments]  ${arg}
    [Documentation]   Takes one argument and *does nothing* with it.
    ...
    ...    Examples:
    ...    | Your Keyword | xxx |
    ...    | Your Keyword | yyy |
    No Operation
5.1.3   Documentation syntax
Libdoc supports documentation in Robot Framework's own documentation syntax, HTML, plain text, and reStructuredText. The format to use can be specified in library source code using ROBOT_LIBRARY_DOC_FORMAT attribute or given from the command line using --docformat (-F) option. In both cases the possible case-insensitive values are ROBOT (default), HTML, TEXT and reST.

Robot Framework's own documentation format is the default and generally recommended format. Other formats are especially useful when using existing code with existing documentation in test libraries.

Robot Framework documentation syntax
Most important features in Robot Framework's documentation syntax are formatting using *bold* and _italic_, custom links and automatic conversion of URLs to links, and the possibility to create tables and pre-formatted text blocks (useful for examples) simply with pipe character. If documentation gets longer, support for section titles can also be handy.

Some of the most important formatting features are illustrated in the example below. Notice that since this is the default format, there is no need to use ROBOT_LIBRARY_DOC_FORMAT attribute nor give the format from the command line.

"""Example library in Robot Framework format.

- Formatting with *bold* and _italic_.
- URLs like http://example.com are turned to links.
- Custom links like [http://robotframework.org|Robot Framework] are supported.
- Linking to `My Keyword` works.
"""

def my_keyword():
    """Nothing more to see here."""
Creating table of contents automatically
With bigger libraries it is often useful to add a table of contents to the library introduction. When using the Robot Framework documentation format, this can be done automatically by adding a special %TOC% marker into a line on its own. The table of contents is created based on the top-level section titles (e.g. = Section =) used in the introduction. In addition to them, the TOC also gets links to the automatically created sections for shortcuts and keywords as well as for importing and tags sections when applicable.

"""Example library demonstrating TOC generation.

The %TOC% marker only creates the actual table of contents and possible
header or other explanation needs to be added separately like done below.

== Table of contents ==

%TOC%

= Section title =

The top-level section titles are automatically added to the TOC.

= Second section =

== Sub section ==

Sub section titles are not added to the TOC.
"""

def my_keyword():
    """Nothing more to see here."""
Note

Automatic TOC generation is a new feature in Robot Framework 3.2.

HTML documentation syntax
When using HTML format, you can create documentation pretty much freely using any syntax. The main drawback is that HTML markup is not that human friendly, and that can make the documentation in the source code hard to maintain and read. Documentation in HTML format is used by Libdoc directly without any transformation or escaping. The special syntax for linking to keywords using syntax like `My Keyword` is supported, however.

Example below contains the same formatting examples as the previous example. Now ROBOT_LIBRARY_DOC_FORMAT attribute must be used or format given on the command line like --docformat HTML.

"""Example library in HTML format.

<ul>
  <li>Formatting with <b>bold</b> and <i>italic</i>.
  <li>URLs are not turned to links automatically.
  <li>Custom links like <a href="http://www.w3.org/html">HTML</a> are supported.
  <li>Linking to `My Keyword` works.
</ul>
"""
ROBOT_LIBRARY_DOC_FORMAT = 'HTML'

def my_keyword():
    """Nothing more to see here."""
Plain text documentation syntax
When the plain text format is used, Libdoc uses the documentation as-is. Newlines and other whitespace are preserved except for indentation, and HTML special characters (<>&) escaped. The only formatting done is turning URLs into clickable links and supporting internal linking like `My Keyword`.

"""Example library in plain text format.

- Formatting is not supported.
- URLs like http://example.com are turned to links.
- Custom links are not supported.
- Linking to `My Keyword` works.
"""
ROBOT_LIBRARY_DOC_FORMAT = 'text'

def my_keyword():
    """Nothing more to see here."""
reStructuredText documentation syntax
reStructuredText is simple yet powerful markup syntax used widely in Python projects (including this User Guide) and elsewhere. The main limitation is that you need to have the docutils module installed to be able to generate documentation using it. Because backtick characters have special meaning in reStructuredText, linking to keywords requires them to be escaped like \`My Keyword\`.

One of the nice features that reStructured supports is the ability to mark code blocks that can be syntax highlighted. Syntax highlight requires additional Pygments module and supports all the languages that Pygments supports.

"""Example library in reStructuredText format.

- Formatting with **bold** and *italic*.
- URLs like http://example.com are turned to links.
- Custom links like reStructuredText__ are supported.
- Linking to \`My Keyword\` works but requires backtics to be escaped.

__ http://docutils.sourceforge.net

.. code:: robotframework

    *** Test Cases ***
    Example
        My keyword    # How cool is this!!?!!?!1!!
"""
ROBOT_LIBRARY_DOC_FORMAT = 'reST'

def my_keyword():
    """Nothing more to see here."""
5.1.4   Internal linking
Libdoc supports internal linking to keywords and different sections in the documentation. Linking is done by surrounding the target name with backtick characters like `target`. Target names are case-insensitive and possible targets are explained in the subsequent sections.

There is no error or warning if a link target is not found, but instead Libdoc just formats the text in italics. Earlier this formatting was recommended to be used when referring to keyword arguments, but that was problematic because it could accidentally create internal links. Nowadays it is recommended to use inline code style with double backticks like ``argument`` instead. The old formatting of single backticks may even be removed in the future in favor of giving an error when a link target is not found.

In addition to the examples in the following sections, internal linking and argument formatting is shown also in the longer example at the end of this chapter.

Linking to keywords
All keywords the library have automatically create link targets and they can be linked using syntax `Keyword Name`. This is illustrated with the example below where both keywords have links to each others.

def keyword(log_level="INFO"):
    """Does something and logs the output using the given level.

    Valid values for log level` are "INFO" (default) "DEBUG" and "TRACE".

    See also `Another Keyword`.
    """
    # ...

def another_keyword(argument, log_level="INFO"):
    """Does something with the given argument else and logs the output.

    See `Keyword` for information about valid log levels.
    """
    # ...
Note

When using reStructuredText documentation syntax, backticks must be escaped like \`Keyword Name\`.

Linking to automatic sections
The documentation generated by Libdoc always contains sections for overall library introduction and for keywords. If a library itself takes arguments, there is also separate importing section. If any of the keywords has tags, a separate selector for them is also shown in the overview.

All the sections act as targets that can be linked, and the possible target names are listed in the table below. Using these targets is shown in the example of the next section.

Automatic section link targets
Section	Target
Introduction	`introduction` and `library introduction`
Importing	`importing` and `library importing`
Keywords	`keywords`
Note

Before Robot Framework 4.0 there were also sections for tags and shortcuts. In Robot Framework 4.0 these have been removed in favor of the overview menu. This means that prior linking to shortcuts or tags sections does not work.

Linking to custom sections
Robot Framework's documentation syntax supports custom section titles, and the titles used in the library or resource file introduction automatically create link targets. The example below illustrates linking both to automatic and custom sections:

"""Library for Libdoc demonstration purposes.

This library does not do anything useful.

= My section  =

We do have a custom section in the documentation, though.
"""

def keyword():
    """Does nothing.

    See `introduction` for more information and `My section` to test how
    linking to custom sections works.
    """
    pass
Note

Linking to custom sections works only when using Robot Framework documentation syntax.

5.1.5   Representing arguments
Libdoc shows information about keywords' arguments automatically.

Included information
The following information is shown for all keywords regardless are they implemented in libraries or in resource files:

Argument name. User keyword arguments are shown without the ${} decoration to make arguments look the same regardless where keywords originate from.
Marker telling is the argument positional-only, named-only, free positional, free named, or normal argument that can be given either by position or by name.
Possible default value. Shown like = 42.
Possible type. Shown like <int>. Can be a link to type documentation as explained in the next section.
When referring to arguments in keyword documentation, it is recommended to use inline code style like ``argument``.

Automatically listing type documentation
As mentioned above, Libdoc automatically shows possible type information when listing arguments. If the type is a custom type based on Enum or TypedDict, the type is automatically converted, or the type has custom converter, also the type itself is listed separately to show more information about it. When these types are used in arguments, the type name also becomes a link to the type information.

All listed data types show possible type documentation as well as what argument types are supported. In addition to that, types based on Enum list available members and types based on TypedDict show the dictionary structure.

Note

Automatically listing types based on Enum and TypedDict is new in Robot Framework 4.0. Listing other types is new in Robot Framework 5.0.

5.1.6   Libdoc example
The following example illustrates how to use the most important documentation formatting possibilities, internal linking, and so on. Click here to see how the generated documentation looks like.

class LoggingLibrary:
    """Library for logging messages.

    = Table of contents =

    %TOC%

    = Usage =

    This library has several keyword, for example `Log Message`, for logging
    messages. In reality the library is used only for _Libdoc_ demonstration
    purposes.

    = Valid log levels =

    Valid log levels are ``INFO``, ``DEBUG``, and ``TRACE``. The default log
    level can be set during `importing`.

    = Examples =

    Notice how keywords are linked from examples.

    | `Log Message`      | My message    |                |               |
    | `Log Two Messages` | My message    | Second message | level=DEBUG   |
    | `Log Messages`     | First message | Second message | Third message |
    """
    ROBOT_LIBRARY_VERSION = '0.1'

    def __init__(self, default_level='INFO'):
        """The default log level can be given at library import time.

        See `Valid log levels` section for information about available log
        levels.

        Examples:

        | =Setting= |     =Value=    | =Value= |          =Comment=         |
        | Library   | LoggingLibrary |         | # Use default level (INFO) |
        | Library   | LoggingLibrary | DEBUG   | # Use the given level      |
        """
        self.default_level = self._verify_level(default_level)

    def _verify_level(self, level):
        level = level.upper()
        if level not in ['INFO', 'DEBUG', 'TRACE']:
            raise RuntimeError("Invalid log level'%s'. Valid levels are "
                               "'INFO', 'DEBUG', and 'TRACE'")
        return level

    def log_message(self, message, level=None):
        """Writes given message to the log file using the specified log level.

        The message to log and the log level to use are defined using
        ``message`` and ``level`` arguments, respectively.

        If no log level is given, the default level given during `library
        importing` is used.
        """
        level = self._verify_level(level) if level else self.default_level
        print("*%s* %s" % (level, message))

    def log_two_messages(self, message1, message2, level=None):
        """Writes given messages to the log file using the specified log level.

        See `Log Message` keyword for more information.
        """
        self.log_message(message1, level)
        self.log_message(message2, level)

    def log_messages(self, *messages):
        """Logs given messages using the log level set during `importing`.

        See also `Log Message` and `Log Two Messages`.
        """
        for msg in messages:
            self.log_message(msg)
All standard libraries have documentation generated by Libdoc and their documentation (and source code) act as a more realistic examples.

5.2   input data documentation tool (Testdoc)
5.2.1   General usage
5.2.2   Generating documentation
Testdoc is Robot Framework's built-in tool for generating high level documentation based on test cases. The created documentation is in HTML format and it includes name, documentation and other metadata of each test suite and test case, as well as the top-level keywords and their arguments.

5.2.1   General usage
Synopsis
python -m robot.testdoc [options] data_sources output_file
Options
-T, --title <title>
 	Set the title of the generated documentation. Underscores in the title are converted to spaces. The default title is the name of the top level suite.
-N, --name <name>
 	Override the name of the top level test suite.
-D, --doc <doc>
 	Override the documentation of the top level test suite.
-M, --metadata <name:value>
 	Set/override free metadata of the top level test suite.
-G, --settag <tag>
 	Set given tag(s) to all test cases.
-t, --test <name>
 	Include tests by name.
-s, --suite <name>
 	Include suites by name.
-i, --include <tag>
 	Include tests by tags.
-e, --exclude <tag>
 	Exclude tests by tags.
-A, --argumentfile <path>
 	Text file to read more arguments from. Works exactly like argument files when running tests.
-h, --help	Print this help in the console.
All options except --title have exactly the same semantics as same options have when executing test cases.

5.2.2   Generating documentation
Data can be given as a single file, directory, or as multiple files and directories. In all these cases, the last argument must be the file where to write the output.

Testdoc can be executed as an installed module like python -m robot.testdoc or as a script like python path/robot/testdoc.py.

Examples:

python -m robot.testdoc my_test.robot testdoc.html
python path/to/robot/testdoc.py --name "Smoke tests" --include smoke path/to/tests smoke.html
5.3   input data clean-up tool (Tidy)
The built-in Tidy tool was deprecated in Robot Framework 4.1 in favor of the new and enhanced external Robotidy tool. It was removed altogether in Robot Framework 5.0.

5.4   External tools
There are plenty of external tools that can be used with Robot Framework. These tools include plugins for various IDEs and text editors, tools for parallel execution and data-driven testing, plugins for continuous integration systems, and so on.

These tools are developed as separate projects independently from Robot Framework itself. For a list of the available tools see http://robotframework.org/.